- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools for everyday life.
[upbeat music]
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at
Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate
from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of my
desire to bring you zero cost
to consumer information about science
and science related tools.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Helix Sleep.
Helix Sleep makes mattresses
that are ideally suited
to your sleep needs.
Helix mattresses are amazing.
I can say this because
I've been sleeping on one
and I've been sleeping better
than I've ever slept before.
The interesting thing
about Helix mattresses
is that they're tailored
to your unique body type
and sleeping style.
What's a sleeping style?
Well, if you go to the Helix site
you can take a quick quiz,
it takes about two minutes,
as to whether or not you sleep on
your stomach, your side, your back,
whether or not you flip back and forth,
or whether or not you don't
know in what position you sleep,
as well as whether or not you
tend to run hot or run cold,
wake up cold, wake up hot, et cetera.
If you do that then it will
match you to the mattress
that's perfect for your sleep needs.
If you wanna try a Helix mattress,
you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman.
And if you do that, you'll
get $200 off your order
as well as two free pillows.
That's helixsleep.com/huberman.
The second sponsor of today's
podcast is Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been using Athletic
Greens since 2012,
and I started using it because
I had a lot of confusion
about what vitamins and
minerals I should take.
And taking Athletic Greens
allowed me to get the foundation
or sort of the base of everything I need
in one easy to consume formula.
It tastes great.
I mix mine with water and a
little bit of lemon juice,
and I like drinking it.
And the probiotics in there
are important to me as well,
because there are a lot
of data out there now
identifying the gut microbiome
and the importance of the gut-brain axis
for immune function, metabolic
function and so forth.
If you want to try Athletic Greens
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman.
And if you do that they'll
also send you a year supply
of liquid vitamin D3, K2.
There are a lot of data
starting to surface
about the importance of vitamin D3
for immune function, metabolic
function, endocrine function,
and so forth.
In addition, if you go to
athleticgreens.com/huberman,
you'll get the year supply of D3 and K2
as well as five free travel packs,
which are a little
packets of Athletic Greens
in addition to your normal order.
And those are great for
when you're on the plane,
or you're otherwise traveling.
They mix up really easily without any
mess or the needs of spoon out powder
and things of that sort.
So the things that are easy to do at home
are kind of harder on the road,
those packets make it
easy while on the road.
Today we're gonna talk about dreaming,
learning during dreaming
and unlearning during dreaming.
In particular unlearning of
troubling emotional events.
Now my interest in dreaming goes way back.
When I was a child I had a friend
and he came over one day and
he brought with him a mask
that had a little red light in the corner.
He had purchased this thing through some
magazine ad that he had seen,
and this mask was supposed
to trigger lucid dreaming.
Lucid dreaming is the experience
of dreaming during sleep,
but being aware that one is dreaming.
And in some cases being
able to direct one's
dream activities.
So if you're in a lucid dream
and you wanna fly, for instance,
some people report being able to
initiate that experience of flying.
Or to contort themselves into an animal,
or to transport themselves
to wherever they want
within the dream.
I tried this device.
The way it worked is you put on the mask
during a waking state, I'm wide awake,
and you look at the little
light flashing in the corner,
and then you'd also wear it
when you went to sleep at night.
And indeed, while I was asleep
I could see the red light
presumably through my eyelids.
Although, for all I know
I had opened my eyes.
I don't know I was asleep.
And then, because I was dreaming
and I was experiencing
something very vivid,
I was able to recognize
that I was dreaming
and then start to direct
some of the events within that dream.
Now lucid dreaming occurs
in about 20% of people
and in a small percentage of those people
they lucid dream almost every night.
So much so that many of them report
their sleep not being as restorative
as it would be otherwise.
Now all of this is to say that,
lucid dreaming and dreaming
are profound experiences.
We tend to feel extremely
attached to our dream experience.
This may explain the phenomenon of
people who have a very intense dream
they need to somehow tell
everybody about that dream,
or tell someone about that dream.
I don't really know what
that behavior is about,
but sometimes we wake up and we feel
so attached to what happened
in this state that we call dreaming
that there seems to be an intense need
to share it with other people,
presumably to process
it and make sense of it.
Now numerous people throughout history
have tried to make sense of dreams
in some sort of organized way.
The most famous of which of
course is a Sigmund Freud
who talked about symbolic
representations in dreams.
A lot of that has been kind of debunked.
Although, I think that
there's some interest in what
the symbols of dreaming are.
And this is something
that we'll talk about
in more depth today, although not Freud
in theory, in particular.
So I think in order to
really think about dreams
and what to do with them
and how to maximize the dream experience
for sake of learning and unlearning,
the best way to address this
is to look at the physiology of sleep,
to really address what do we
know concretely about sleep.
So first of all, as we get sleepy
we tend to shut our eyes, and
that's 'cause there's some
autonomic centers in
the brain, some neurons
that control closing of the
eyelids when we get sleepy.
And then we transitioned into sleep.
And sleep, regardless of how long we sleep
is generally broken up into
a series of 90 minute cycles.
These ultradian cycles.
So early in the night
these 90 minute cycles
tend to be comprised more of shallow sleep
and slow wave sleep.
So stage one, stage two, et cetera,
and what we call slow wave sleep.
I'll go into detail about what
all this means in a moment.
And we tend to have less
so-called REM sleep, R-E-M sleep,
which stands for rapid eye movement sleep.
And I'll talk about rapid
eye movement sleep in detail.
So early in the night, a
lot more slow wave sleep
and less REM.
For every 90 minute cycle that we have
during a night of sleep we tend to
start having more and more REM sleep.
So more of that 90 minute cycle
is comprised of REM sleep
and less of slow wave sleep.
Now this is true regardless
of whether or not
you wake up in the middle of
the night to use the restroom
or your sleep is broken.
The more sleep you're
getting across the night,
the more REM sleep you're going to have.
And REM sleep and non
REM, as I'll refer to it,
have distinctly different roles
in learning and unlearning,
and they are responsible
for learning and unlearning
of distinctly different
types of information.
And this has enormous implications
for learning of motor skills,
for unlearning of traumatic events,
or for processing emotionally challenging
as well as emotionally pleasing events.
And as we'll see, one
can actually leverage
their daytime activities
in order to access
more slow wave sleep or non
REM sleep as we'll call it,
or more REM sleep depending
on your particular
emotional and physical needs.
So it's really a remarkable stage of life
that we have a lot more
control and power over
then you might believe.
We'll also talk about lucid dreaming.
We're also gonna talk about hallucinations
and how drug induced hallucinations
have a surprising similarity
to a lot of dream states
and yet some really important differences.
Okay. So let's start by
talking about slow wave sleep,
or non REM sleep.
And I realized that slow
wave sleep and non REM sleep
aren't exactly the same thing.
So for you sleep aficionados out there,
I am lumping right now.
As we say in science,
there are lumpers and there
are splitters and I am both.
Sometimes I lump, sometimes I split.
For sake of clarity and ease
of conversation right now
I'm gonna be a lumper.
When I say slow wave sleep, I
mean non REM sleep generally.
Although, I acknowledge
there is a distinction.
Slow wave sleep.
So slow wave sleep is characterized
by a particular pattern of brain activity
in which the brain is
metabolically active,
but that there's these big
sweeping waves of activity
that include a lot of the brain.
If you wanna look this up
you can find evidence for
sweeping of waves of neural activity
across association cortex,
across big swaths of the brainstem,
the so-called pons
geniculate occipital pathway.
This is brainstem,
thalamus, and then cortex
for those of you that are interested.
Although, more of that is
going to occur in REM sleep.
Now the interesting thing
about slow wave sleep
are the neuromodulators that
tend to be associated with it,
that are most active and least active
during slow wave sleep and here's why.
To remind you neuromodulators
are these chemicals
that act rather slowly but their main role
is to bias particular
brain circuits to be active
and other brain circuits to not be active.
These are like the music playlist.
So think of neuromodulators
and these come in the names of,
acetylcholine, norepinephrine,
serotonin, and dopamine,
think of them as suggesting
playlists on your audio device.
So, you know, classical music is
distinctly different in feel and tone
and a number of other features
from like third wave punk,
or from, you know, hip hop, right?
So think of them as biasing
toward particular genres of
neural circuit activity, okay.
Mellow music versus really
aggressive fast music,
or rhythmic music that includes lyrics
versus rhythmic music that
doesn't include lyrics.
It's more or less the way
to think about these neuromodulators.
And they are associated as a consequence
with certain brain functions.
So we know for instance
and just to review,
acetylcholine in waking states
is a neuromodulator that tends to amplify
the activity of brain circuits
associated with focus and attention.
Norepinephrine is a
neuromodulator that tends to
amplify the brain circuits
associated with alertness,
and the desire to move.
Serotonin is the neuromodulator
that's released intense to amplify the
circuits in the brain and body
that are associated with bliss
and the desire to remain still.
And dopamine is the neuromodulator
that's released and is associated with
amplification of the neural
circuits in the brain and body
associated with pursuing
goals and pleasure and reward.
Okay. So in slow wave sleep
something really interesting happens.
There is essentially no acetylcholine.
Acetylcholine production
and release and action
from the two major sites,
which are in the brainstem,
which from a nucleus if it's
a parabigerminal nucleus,
if you really wanna know,
or from the forebrain,
which is nucleus basalis.
And you don't need to know these names
but if you like, that's
why I put them out there.
Acetylcholine production plummets.
It's just almost to zero.
And acetylcholine as I just mentioned,
is associated with focus.
So you can think of slow wave sleep
as these big sweeping waves
of activity through the brain
and a kind of distortion
of space and time,
so that we're not really
focusing on any one thing.
Now the other molecules that
are very active at that time
are norepinephrine.
Which is a little bit surprising 'cause
normally in waking states norepinephrine
is gonna be associated with
a lot of alertness and the desire to move.
But there's not a ton of norepinephrine
around in slow wave
sleep, but it is around.
So there's something associated
with the movement circuitry
going on in slow wave sleep.
And remember, this is happening mostly
at the beginning of the night,
your sleep is dominated
by slow wave sleep.
So no acetylcholine, very
little norepinephrine,
although there is some
and a lot of serotonin.
And serotonin again is
associated with this desire,
this sensation of kind
of bliss or wellbeing,
but not a lot of movement.
And during sleep you tend not to move.
Now in slow wave sleep you can
move, you're not paralyzed.
So you can roll over.
If people are going to sleep walk,
typically it's going to
be during slow wave sleep.
And what studies have shown through some
kind of sadistic experiments
where people are deprived
specifically of slow wave sleep,
and that can be done by waking them up
as soon as the electrode recording show
that they're in slow wave sleep
or by chemically altering their sleep
so that it biases them
away from slow wave sleep.
What studies have shown
is that motor learning
is generally occurring in slow wave sleep.
So let's say the day
before you go to sleep
you were learning some new dance move,
or you were learning some
specific motor skill,
either a fine motor skill
or a course motor skill.
So let's say, it's a new form of exercise
or some new coordinated movements.
This could be coordinate movement
at the level of the fingers,
or it could be coordinated
movement the level of whole body
and large limb movements.
It could involve other people,
or it could be a solo activity.
Learning of those skills
is happening primarily
during slow wave sleep
in the early part of the night.
In addition, slow wave sleep
has been shown to be important
for the learning of detailed information.
Now this isn't always
cognitive information.
We're gonna talk about
cognitive information,
but the studies that have been done
along these lines involve having people
learn very detailed information
about very specific rules
and the way that certain
words are spelled,
they tend to be challenging words.
So if people are tested and
in terms of their performance
on these types of exams
and they're deprived of slow wave sleep,
they tend to perform very poorly.
So we can think of slow wave sleep
as important for motor learning,
motor skill learning
and for the learning of specific details
about specific events.
And this turns out to be
fundamentally important
because now we know that
slow wave sleep is primarily
in the early part of the night,
and motor learning is occurring primarily
early in the night, and
detailed learning is
occurring early in the night.
Now for those of you that are waking up
after only three, four hours of sleep,
this might be informative.
This might tell you a
little something about
what you are able to learn
and not able to learn
if that were to be the
only sleep that you get.
Although, hopefully that's not
the only sleep that you get.
But we're going to dive deep into
how it is that one can
maximize motor learning
in order to extract say,
more detail information
about coordinated movements
and how to make them faster or slower.
So that might be important
for certain sports.
It might be almost certainly
important for certain sports.
It's gonna be important for
any kind of coordinated movement,
like say learning to play the piano,
or for instance, how to
learn synchronized movements
with somebody else.
So maybe I mentioned the
example of dance earlier.
Like me a few years ago,
I set out to learn tango
because I have some Argentine
relatives and I was a Bismal.
I need to return to that at some point.
I was just a Bismal.
And one of the worst things
about being a bismal at
learning dance is that,
that somebody else has to
suffer the consequences also.
So I don't know maybe in the
month on neuroplasticity,
I'll explore that again
as a self experimentation.
But, the key things to know are
slow wave sleep is
involved in motor learning
and detailed learning.
There's no acetylcholine
around at that time,
has these big amplitude activity
sweeping throughout the
brain and that there's
the release of these neuromodulators,
norepinephrine and serotonin.
And again, that's all
happening early in the night.
So athletes, people that are
concerned about performance,
if you happen to wake up
after just a couple hours of,
you know, three, four hours of sleep
because you're excited about
a competition the next day,
presumably if you've already trained
the skills that you need for the event
you should be fine to engage
in that particular activity.
Now it's always going to be better
to get a full night's sleep.
And that, you know, a full night's sleep
for you is six hours then
it's always gonna be better
to get more sleep than it is to get less.
However, I think some people
get a little bit overly concerned
that if they didn't get
their full night's sleep
before some sort of physical event
that their performance
is going to plummet.
Presumably, if you've already
learned what you need to do,
and it's stored in your neural circuits
and you know how to make
those coordinated movements,
what the literature on slow
wave sleep suggest is that
you would be replenished.
That the motor learning and
the recovery from exercise
is going to happen early
in the night. Okay.
So we'll just pause there,
and kind of shelve that for a moment
and then we're gonna come back to it.
But I wanna talk about REM sleep,
or rapid eye movement sleep.
REM sleep and rapid eye movement sleep,
as I mentioned before,
occurs throughout the night,
but you're gonna have more of it.
A larger percentage of
these 90 minute sleep cycles
is going to be comprised of REM sleep
as you get toward morning.
REM sleep is fascinating.
It was discovered in '50s when
a sleep laboratory in Chicago,
the researchers observed
that people's eyes were
moving under their eyelids.
Now, something very important
that we're going to address
when we talk about trauma later is that,
the eye movements are
not just side to side
they're very erratic in
all different directions.
One thing that I don't think
I've never heard anyone
really talk about publicly is,
why eye movements during
sleep, right? Eyes are closed.
And sometimes people's eyelids
will be a little bit open
and their eyes are darting around,
especially in little kids.
I don't suggest you do this.
I'm not even sure it's ethical.
But, it has been done where you, you know,
pull back the eyelids of a
kid while they're sleeping
and their eyes are kind of
darting all over the place.
I think people do this to
their passed out friends
at parties and things like that.
So again, I don't suggest you do it,
but I'm telling you it
because it's been done before
and therefore you don't
have to do it again.
But rapid eye movement
sleep is fascinating
and occurs because there are connections
between the brainstem,
an area called the pons,
and areas of the thalamus
and the top of the brain stem
that are involved in generating movements
in different directions,
sometimes called saccades.
Although, sometimes during
rapid eye movement sleep
it's not just rapid,
it's kind of a jittery
side to side thing and then
the eyeballs kind of role.
It's really pretty creepy
to look at if you see.
So what's happening there is
the circuitry that is involved
in conscious eye movements
is kind of going haywire,
but it's not haywire.
It's these waves of
activity from the brainstem
up to the so-called thalamus,
which is an area that
filter sensory information
and then up to the cortex.
And the cortex of course,
is involved in conscious perceptions.
So in rapid eye movement sleep
there are a couple of things are happening
besides rapid eye movements.
The main ones are that
they're, I should say,
in contrast to slow wave sleep.
In REM sleep serotonin is
essentially absent. Okay?
So this molecule, this neuromodulator
that tends to create the
feeling of bliss and wellbeing
and just calm placidity is absent.
All right. So that's interesting.
In addition to that,
norepinephrine this molecule
that's involved in movement and alertness
is absolutely absent.
It's probably one of the few times
in our life that epinephrin is essentially
at zero activity within our system.
And that has a number of
very important implications
for the sorts of dreaming that occur
during REM sleep and the sorts
of learning that can occur
in REM sleep and unlearning.
First of all in REM
sleep, we are paralyzed.
We are experiencing what's called atonia,
which just means that
we're completely laid out and paralyzed.
We also tend to experience
whatever it is that we're dreaming about
as a kind of hallucination,
or a hallucinatory activity.
Long ago I looked into
hallucinations and dreaming
I was just fascinated
by this in high school.
And there's some great books on this
if you're interested in
exploring the relationship between
hallucinations and dreaming.
The most famous of which are from a guy,
a researcher at Harvard, Alan Hobson,
you know, wrote a book
called, Dream Drug Store.
And talked all about
the similarities between
drugs that induce hallucinations
and dreaming in REM.
So you can explore that if you like.
So in REM our eyes are moving,
but the rest of our body is paralyzed
and we are hallucinating.
There's no epinephrin around.
Epinephrin doesn't just create
a desire to move and alertness.
It is also the chemical
signature of fear and anxiety.
It's what's released
from our adrenal glands
when we experience something
that's fearful or alerting.
So if a car suddenly
screeches in front of us,
or we get a troubling text message,
adrenaline is deployed into our system.
Adrenaline is epinephrin,
those are equivalent molecules.
And epinephrin isn't just
released from our adrenals
it's also released within our brain.
So there's this weird stage of our life
that happens more toward
morning, that we call REM sleep,
where we're hallucinating
and having these outrageous
experiences in our mind,
but the chemical that's
associated with fear and panic
and anxiety is not available to us.
And that turns out to be very important.
And you can imagine why that's important.
It's important because it
allows us to experience things,
both replay of things
that did occur as well as
elaborate contortions of
things that didn't occur.
And it allows us to experience those
in the absence of fear and anxiety,
and that it turns out is very important
for adjusting our emotional relationship
to challenging things that happened to us
while we were awake.
Those challenging things can
sometimes be in the form of
social anxiety, or just
having been working very hard
or concern about an upcoming event,
or sometimes people report for instance,
dreams where they find
themselves late to an exam,
or naked in public, or
in some sort of situation
that would be very troubling to them.
And that almost certainly
occurs during REM sleep.
So we have this incredible period of sleep
in which our experience of
emotionally laid in events
is dissociated. It's chemically blocked
from us having the actual emotion.
Now probably immediately
some of you are thinking,
"Well, what about nightmares?
I have nightmares and those
carry a lot of emotion,
or sometimes I'll wake up in a panic."
Let's consider each of
those two things separately
because they are important
in understanding REM sleep.
There's a good chance that nightmares
are occurring slow wave sleep.
There are actually some drugs
that I don't suggest people take.
In fact so much so I'm
not gonna mention them
that give people very
kind of scary or eerie
dreams and this kind of
feeling that things are pursuing them,
or that they can't move
when they are being chased.
That's actually a common
dream that I've had.
I guess, it's more or less a nightmare.
The feeling that one is paralyzed
and can't move and is being chased.
A lot of people have said, "Oh,
that must be in REM sleep."
Because you're paralyzed and so
you're dreaming about being
paralyzed and you can't move.
I think that's probably false.
The research says that
because no epinephrine
is absent during REM sleep,
it's very unlikely that you can have these
intense, fearful memories.
So those are probably
occurring in slow wave sleep.
Although, there might be instances
where people have nightmares in REM sleep.
The other thing is some people experience,
certainly I've had this experience,
of waking up and feeling very stressed
about whatever it was that I
happen to be thinking about,
or dreaming about in the moments before.
And that's an interesting
case of an invasion
of the dream state into the waking state
and the moment you wake up
epinephrine is available.
So the research on this
isn't fully crystallized,
but most of it points in the direction of
the experience of waking up
and feeling very panicked.
Maybe, I wanna highlight may,
but maybe that you were
experiencing something
that was troubling in the daytime,
you're repeating that
experience in your sleep,
epinephrine is not available,
and therefore the brain
circuits associated
with fear and anxiety are shut off.
And so you're able to process those events
and then suddenly you wake up
and there's a surge of
adrenaline of epinephrin
that's now coupled to that experience.
So nightmares very
likely in slow wave sleep
and that kind of panic
on waking from something
very likely to be an invasion
of the thoughts and ideas,
however distorted in REM sleep
invading the waking state.
In fact, that brings to mind something
that I've mentioned once before,
but I wanna mention again,
this atonia, this paralysis
that we experience during sleep
can invade the waking state.
Many people report the
experience of waking up
and being paralyzed.
They're legitimately waking
up, it's not a dream.
Waking up and being paralyzed,
and it is terrifying.
I've had this happen before.
It is I can tell you
terrifying to be wide awake,
and as far as I could
tell fully conscious,
but unable to move.
And then generally you can
jolt yourself out of it
in a few seconds, but
it is quite frightening.
Now some people actually
experience waking up,
being fully paralyzed and hallucinating.
And there is a theory in the
academic and scientific
community at least,
that what people report
as alien abductions
have a certain number of
core characteristics that map
quite closely, yearly
similarly to these experiences.
A lot of reports of
alien abduction involve
people being unable to move,
seeing particular faces,
hallucinating, extensively feeling
like their body is floating,
or they were transported.
This is very similar to
the experience of invasion
of atonia into the waking state,
waking up and still being paralyzed.
As well as the hallucinations that
are characteristic of
dreaming and REM sleep.
Now I'm not saying that people's
alien abductions were not
legitimate alien abductions,
how could I, I wasn't there.
And if I was there I wouldn't tell you
'cause that would make me an alien,
and I wouldn't want you to know.
But it is quite possible
that people are experiencing these things
and they are an invasion
of the sleep state
into the waking state
and they can last several
minutes or longer.
And because in dreams, space
and time are distorted,
our perception of these events
could be that they lasted many hours
and we can really feel as
if they lasted many hours,
when in fact they took only moments.
And we're gonna return to
distortion of space and time
in a little bit.
So to just recap we've gone so far.
Slow wave sleep early in the night.
It's been shown to be
important for motor learning
and for detailed learning.
REM sleep has a certain dream component
when which there's no epinephrin,
therefore we can't experience anxiety,
we are paralyzed.
Those dreams tend to be really vivid
and have a lot of detail to them.
And yet in REM sleep what's very clear
is that the sorts of learning
that happened in REM sleep
are not motor events.
It's more about unlearning
of emotional events.
And now we know why,
because the chemicals available for
really feeling those
emotions are not present.
Now that has very important implications.
So let's address those
implications from two sides.
First of all we should ask,
what happens if we don't
get enough REM sleep?
And a scenario that happens a lot
where people don't get enough
REM sleep is the following.
I'll just explain the one
that I'm familiar with
'cause it happens to me a lot,
although I figured out ways to adjust.
I go to sleep around 10:30, 11:00,
I fall asleep very easily
and then I wake up around 3:00 or 4:00 AM.
I now know to use a NSDR, a
non sleep deep rest protocol
and that allows me to fall back asleep.
Even though it's called
non sleep depressed
it's really allows me to
relax my body and brain,
and I tend to fall back asleep
and sleep till about 7:00 AM.
During which time I
get a lot of REM sleep.
And I know this because I've measured it,
and I know this because my
dreams tend to be very intense
of the sort that we know
is typical of REM sleep.
In this scenario,
I've gotten my slow wave
sleep early in the night
and I've got my REM sleep toward morning.
However, there are times when
I don't go back to sleep,
maybe I have a flight to
catch, that's happened.
Sometimes I've got a lot on my mind
and I don't go back to sleep.
I can tell you, and you've
probably experienced that
the lack of REM sleep tends to make people
emotionally irritable.
It tends to make us feel
as if the little things
are the big things.
So it's very clear from laboratory studies
where people have been deprived
selectively of REM sleep,
that our emotionality tends
to get a little bit unhinged
and we tend to catastrophize small things.
We tend to feel like the
world is really daunting,
we're never gonna move forward
in the ways that we want.
We can't unlearn the emotional components
of whatever it is that has been happening,
even if it's not traumatic.
The other thing that happens in REM sleep
is a replay of certain
types of spatial information
about where we were and why
we were in those places.
And this maps to some beautiful data
and studies that were initiated
by a guy named Matt
Wilson at MIT years ago.
Showing that in rodents and it turns out
in other non-human primates and in humans
there's a replay of spacial
information during REM sleep,
that almost precisely maps to the
activity that we
experienced during the day
as we move from one place to another.
So here's a common world
scenario, you go to a new place,
you navigate through that
city or that environment,
this place doesn't have to be,
you know, at the scale of a city.
It can be a new building.
It could be finding particular rooms,
new social interaction.
You experience that and
if it's important enough,
that becomes solidified a few days later
and you won't forget it.
If it's unimportant,
you'll probably forget it.
During REM sleep there's a literal replay
of the exact firing of the neurons
that occurred while you were navigating
that same city you're building earlier.
So REM sleep seems to be involved in
the generation of this
detailed spatial information.
But, what is it that's actually
happening in REM sleep?
So there's this uncoupling of emotion,
but most of all what's
happening in REM sleep is that
we're forming a relationship with
particular rules or algorithms.
We're starting to figure out
based on all the experience
that we had during the day,
whether or not it's important
that we avoid certain people
or that we approach certain people,
whether or not it's important that,
you know, when we enter a building
that we go into the elevator
and turn left where the
bathroom is, for instance.
These general themes
of things and locations
and how they fit together
and that has a word
it's called meaning.
During our day we're
experiencing all sorts of things.
Meaning is how we each
individually piece together
the relevance of one
thing to the next, right?
So if I suddenly told you that, you know,
this pen was downloading all
the information to my brain
that was important to
deliver this information,
you'd probably think I was
a pretty strange character.
Because typically we don't think of pens
as downloading information into brains.
But if I told you that I
was getting information
from my computer that was allowing me to
say things to you, you'd say,
"Well, that's perfectly reasonable."
And that's because we have a clear
and agreed upon association with computers
and information and memory,
and we don't have that
same association with pens.
You might say, "Well, duh."
But something in our brain
needs to solidify those relationships
and make sure that the certain
relationships don't exist.
And it appears that REM
sleep is important for that,
because when you deprive
yourself or people of REM
they start seeing odd associations,
they tend to lump or batch things.
I know this from my own experience
of I've ever been sleep deprived,
which unfortunately
happens too often because
I'm terrible with deadlines,
pull an all-nighter,
the word the starts to look
like it's spelled incorrectly.
And the is a very simple word to spell,
but things start to
look a little distorted.
And we know that if people
are deprived of REM sleep
for very long periods of time,
they start hallucinating.
They literally start seeing relationships
and movement of objects
that isn't happening.
And so REM sleep is
really where we establish
the emotional load, but where we also,
start discarding of all the
meanings that are irrelevant.
And if you think about emotionality,
a lot of over emotionality
or catastrophizing
is about seeing problems everywhere.
And you could imagine why
that might occur if you start
linking the web of your
experience too extensively.
It's very important in order to have
healthy, emotional, and
cognitive functioning
that we have fairly narrow channels
between individual things.
If we see something on the
news that's very troubling,
well, then it makes sense
to be very troubled.
But if we're troubled by everything
and we start just saying, you know,
"Everything is bothering me
and I'm feeling highly irritable
and everything is just
distorting and troubling me."
Chances are we are not
actively removing the
meaning, the connectivity
between life experiences
as well as we could
and that almost always maps
back to a deficit in REM sleep.
So REM sleep is powerful and
has this amazing capacity
to eliminate the meanings
that don't matter.
It's not that it exacerbates
the meanings that do matter,
but it eliminates the
meanings that don't matter.
And that bears a striking resemblance
to what happens early in development.
This isn't a discussion
about early in development,
but early in development the reason a baby
can't generate coordinated movements,
and the reason why children
can get very emotional about
what seems like trivial events,
or what adults know to be trivial events.
Like, "Oh, the ice cream shop is closed."
And then the kid just dissolves into,
you know, a puddle of
tears and the parents say,
"Okay, well, it'll be open
again in another time."
The children one of the
reasons that they can't
generate coordinated movement,
or place that of the ice
cream shop being closed
into a larger context,
is because they have
too much connectivity.
And much of the maturation of
the brain and nervous system
that brings us to the point of being
emotionally stable, reasonable,
rational human beings
is about elimination of
connections between things.
So REM sleep seems to be where we uncouple
the potential for emotionality
between various experiences.
And that brings us to
the absolutely fundamental relationship
and similarity of REM sleep
to some of the clinical practices
that have been designed
to eliminate emotionality
and help people move through trauma
and other troubling experiences,
whether or not those
troubling experiences are
a death in the family
of a close loved one,
something terrible that happened
to you or somebody else,
or, you know, an entire
childhood or some event
that in your mind and body is
felt as and experienced as,
bad, terrible, or concerning.
Many of you perhaps have heard of
trauma treatment such as EMDR,
eye movement desensitization reprocessing,
or ketamine treatment for trauma.
Something that recently became legal
and is in fairly widespread clinical use.
Interestingly enough, EMDR and ketamine
at kind of a core level,
bear very similar features to REM sleep.
So let's talk about EMDR first.
EMDR, eye movement
desensitization reprocessing
is something that was
developed by a psychologist,
Francine Shapiro.
She actually was in Palo Alto.
And the story goes that she was walking,
not so incidentally,
in the trees and forest behind Stanford,
and she was recalling a
troubling event in her own mind.
So this would be from her own life.
And she realized that as she was walking,
the emotional load of that experience
was not as intense or severe.
She extrapolated from
that experience of walking
and not feeling as stressed
about the stressful event
to a practice that she put into work in
with her clients, with her patients,
and that now has become fairly widespread.
It's actually one of the
few behavior treatments
that are approved by the American
Psychological Association
for the treatment of trauma.
what she had her clients and patients do
was move their eyes from side to side
while recounting some
traumatic or troubling event.
Now this was of course in the clinic.
And I'm guessing that she
removed the walking component
and just took the eye movement component
to the clinic because
while it would be nice
to go on therapy sessions
with your therapist and
take walks there are certain
boundaries to that such
as, confidentiality.
You know, if there are
a lot of people around
a person might not feel as
open to discussing things,
or weather barriers and things like that,
you know, if it's raining
or hailing outside,
it gets tough to do.
Why eye movements?
Well, she never really
said why eye movements.
But, soon I'll tell
you why the decision to
select these lateralized eye movements
for the work in the
clinic was the right one.
So these eye movements, they look silly.
I'll do them because that's why I'm here.
They look silly, but
they basically involve
sitting in a chair and moving
one's eyes from side to side,
not while talking. But,
you know, for it's...
And then recounting the events.
So it's sometimes talking
while moving the eyes,
but usually it was moving the
eyes from side to side for
30, 60 seconds, then describing
this challenging procedure.
Now as a vision scientist
who also works on stress
when I first heard this, I
thought it was crazy, frankly.
People would ask me about EMDR
and I just thought, "That's crazy."
I went and looked up some of the theories
about why EMDR might work
and there were a bunch of theories.
"Oh, it mimics the eye
movements during REM sleep."
That was one.
It turns out that's not
true and I'll explain why.
The other one was, "Oh, it
synchronizes the activity
on the two sides of the brain."
Well, sort of, I mean, when you look
into both sides of the
binocular visual field
you activate the visual cortex.
But, this whole idea of synchrony
between the two sides of the brain
is something that I
think modern neuroscience
is starting to, let's just say,
gently or not so gently move away from.
This whole right brain,
left brain business.
It turns out however, that eye movements
are the sort that I just did
and that Francine Shapiro
took from this walk experience
and brought to her clients in the clinic,
are the sorts of eye
movements that you generate
whenever you're moving through space,
when you are self-generating
that movement.
So not so much when you're driving a car,
but certainly if you
were riding a bicycle,
or you were walking or you were running,
you don't realize it
but you have these reflexive
subconscious eye movements
that go from side to side,
and they are associated
with the motor system.
So when you move forward
your eyes go like this.
There've been a number of studies
showing that these lateralized
eye movements helped people
move through or dissociate
the emotional experience
of particular traumas
with those experiences,
such that they could
recall those experiences
after the treatment
and not feel stressed about them,
or they didn't report them
as traumatic any longer.
Now the success rate wasn't 100%,
but they were statistically significant
in a number of studies.
And yet there are still
some critics of EMDR.
And frankly, for a long
time I still thought,
"Well, I don't know. This just
seems like kind of a hack."
It just seems like kind of
something that for which we
don't know the mechanism,
and we can't explain,
But in the last five years,
there have been no fewer than
five and there's a sixth on the way,
high quality peer reviewed manuscripts
published in Journal of
Neuroscience, Neuron,
Cell Press Journal, Excellent Journal,
Nature Excellent Journal.
These are very stringent
journals and papers
showing that lateralized eye movements
of the sort that I just did,
and if you're just listening to this
it's just moving the eyes from
side to side with eyes open.
That those eye movements but
not vertical eye movements
suppress the activity of the amygdala,
which is this brain region
that is involved in threat detection,
stress, anxiety, and fear.
There are some forms of fear
that are not amygdala dependent,
but the amygdala it's not a fear center,
but it is critical for the fear response
and for the experience of anxiety.
So that's interesting.
We've got a clinical tool now
that indeed shows a lot of success
in a good number of people,
where eye movements from side to side
are suppressing the amygdala.
And the general theme is to
use those eye movements to
suppress the fear response,
and then to recount or
repeat the experience
and over time uncouple
the heavy emotional load,
the sadness, the depression,
the anxiety, the fear
from whatever it was that
happened that was traumatic.
This is important to understand because,
you know, I'd love to
be able to tell somebody
who had a traumatic experience
that they would forget that experience,
but the truth is you never
forget the traumatic experience.
What you do is you remove
the emotional load.
Eventually it really
does lose its potency.
The emotional potency is alleviated.
Now EMDR I should just mention,
tends to be most
successful for single event
or very specific kinds of trauma
that happened over and over,
as opposed to say an entire
childhood or an entire divorce.
It tends to be most effective for
single event kinds of things,
car crashes, et cetera,
where people can really recall the events
in quite a lot of detail.
So it's not for everybody
and it should be done...
If it's going to be done for trauma
it should be done in a clinical setting
with somebody who's certified to do this.
But that bears a lot of
resemblance to REM sleep, right?
This experience in our sleep where
our eyes are moving, excuse me,
although in a different way,
but we don't have the chemical epinephrine
in order to generate the fear response,
and yet we're remembering
the event from the previous day or days.
Sometimes in REM sleep we
think about things happened
a long time ago. So that's interesting.
And then now there's this new treatment,
this chemical treatment
with the drug ketamine,
which also bears a lot of resemblance to
the sorts of things that
happen in REM sleep.
Ketamine is getting a
lot of attention now.
And I think a lot of people just
don't realize what ketamine is.
Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic.
It is remarkably similar
to the drug called PCP,
which is certainly a hazardous drug
for people to use.
Ketamine and PCP both function
to disrupt the activity
of a particular receptor
in the brain called the NMDA receptor,
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor.
This is a receptor that's
in the surface of neurons
or on the surface of neurons for which
most of the time it's not active,
but when something very extreme happens
and there's a lot of activity
in the neural pathway
that impinges on that receptor,
it opens and it allows
the entry of molecules,
ions that trigger a cellular process
that we call long-term potentiation.
And long-term potentiation translates to
a change in connectivity so that later
you don't need that intense event
for the neuron to become active again.
Let me clarify a little bit of this.
The NMDA receptor is gated
by intense experience.
One way you could think about this is,
typically I walk in my home,
I might make some food and
sit down at my kitchen table,
and I don't think
anything about explosions.
But were I to come home one night,
sit down to a bowl of chicken soup
and there was a massive explosion
the neurons are associated with
chicken soup in my kitchen table
would be active in a way
that was different than
they were previously,
and will be coupled to this
experience of explosions
such that the next time,
and perhaps every other time
that I go to sit down
at the kitchen table,
no matter how rational I am
about the origins of that explosion,
maybe it was a gas truck
that was down the road
and there's no reason to
think it's there today,
but I would have the same experience.
Those neurons will become active
and I'd get an increase in heart rate.
I'd get an increase in
sweating, et cetera.
Ketamine blocks this NMDA
receptor and prevents
that crossover and the addition of meaning
to the kitchen table, kitchen soup,
excuse me, chicken soup
explosion experience.
So how is ketamine being used?
Ketamine is being used to prevent learning
of emotions very soon after trauma.
So ketamine is being stocked
in a number of different emergency rooms,
where if people are brought in quickly
and, you know, these are
hard to describe even
but, you know, a horrible experience of
somebody seeing a loved one next to them
killed in a car accident and
they were driving that car.
This isn't for everybody,
certainly and you need to
talk to your physician,
but ketamine is being used
so they might infuse
somebody with ketamine
so that their emotion it can still occur,
but that the plasticity,
the change in the wiring of their brain
won't allow that intense emotion
to be attached to the experience.
Now immediately you can imagine
the sort of ethical
implications of this, right?
Because certain emotions need
to be coupled to experiences.
I'm not saying that people
should be using ketamine,
or shouldn't be using ketamine,
certainly not recreationally
it's quite dangerous.
It can be lethal and like PCP it can cause
pretty dramatic changes in
perception and behavior.
But in the clinical setting
the basis of ketamine assisted therapies
is really to remove emotion.
And I think the way I've been
hearing about it talked
about in the general public
is a lot of people think
it's a little bit more like
the kind of psilocybin
trials or the NMDA trials,
where it's about becoming more emotional
or getting in touch with
a certain experience.
Ketamine is about becoming dissociative
or removed from the emotional
component of experience.
So now we have ketamine, which
chemically blocks plasticity
and prevents the connection between
an emotion and an experience.
That's a pharmacologic intervention.
We have EMDR, which is
this eye movement thing
that is designed to suppress the amygdala,
and it's designed to remove emotionality
while somebody recounts an experience.
And we have REM sleep, where
the chemical epinephrin that
allows for signaling of intense emotion
and the experience of a tense
emotion in the brain and body
is not allowed.
So we're starting to see
a organizational logic,
which is that a certain
component of our sleeping life
is acting like therapy.
And that's really what REM sleep is about.
So we should really think about REM sleep
and slow wave sleep as both critical.
Slow wave sleep for motor
learning and detailed learning.
REM sleep for attaching of emotions
to particular experiences.
And then for making sure that the emotions
are not attached to the wrong experiences
and for unlearning emotional responses
if they're too intense or severe.
And this all speaks to
the great importance of
mastering one sleep,
something that we talked about in episode
two of the podcast.
And making sure that if
life has disruptive events,
either due to travel or stress,
or changes in school
hours or food schedule,
something that we talked about
in episodes three and four,
that one can still grab a hold
and manage one sleep life.
Because fundamentally the
unlearning of emotions
that are troubling to us
is what allows us to move forward in life.
And indeed the REM deprivation studies
show that people become hyperemotional.
They start to catastrophize.
And it's no surprise therefore,
that sleep disturbances correlate
with so many emotional and
psychological disturbances.
By now it should just be obvious
why that will be the case.
In fact, the other day
I was in a discussion
with a colleague of mine
who's down in Australia, Dr. Sarah McKay.
I've known her for two decades now
from the time she was at Oxford.
And Sarah studies among other
things menopause in the brain.
And she was saying that
a lot of the emotional
effects of menopause,
actually are not directly
related to the hormones.
There've been some really
nice studies showing that
the disruptions in temperature
regulation in menopause
mapped to changes in sleep regulation
that then impact emotionality
and an inability to
correctly adjust the circuits
related to emotionality.
And I encourage you to look at her work.
We'll probably have her
as a guest on the podcast
at some point in the future,
'cause she's so knowledgeable
about those sorts of issues,
as well as issues related
to testosterone and
in people with all sorts of different
chromosomal backgrounds.
So sleep deprivation isn't
just deprivation of energy.
It's not just deprivation
of immune function.
It is deprivation of self-induced therapy
every time we go to sleep.
Okay. So things like EMDR
and ketamine therapies
are in-clinic therapies,
but REM sleep is the one
that you're giving yourself
every night when you go to sleep.
Which raises, I think,
the other important question which is,
how to get and how to
know if you're getting
the appropriate amount of REM
sleep and slow wave sleep.
So that's what we'll talk about next.
So how should one go about
getting the appropriate amount
of slow-wave sleep and REM sleep
and knowing that you're
getting the right amount.
Well, short of hooking
yourself up to an EEG,
it's gonna be tough to
get exact measurements
of brain states from night to night.
Some people nowadays
are using things like,
the Oura Ring or a WHOOP
band, or some other device
to measure the quality
and depth and duration
of their sleep.
And for many people those
devices can be quite useful.
Some people are only gauging
their sleep by way of
whether or not they feel rested,
whether or not they feel
like they're learning
and they're getting better or not.
There are some things
that one can really do.
And the first one might surprise you
in light of everything I've said,
and probably everything
you've heard about sleep.
There was a study done by
a Harvard undergraduate,
Emily Hoagland, who was
in Robert Stickgold's lab
at the time.
And that's the study explored how
variations in total sleep
time related to learning,
as compared to total sleep time itself.
And to summarize the study,
what they found was that
it was more important to have
a regular amount of sleep each night
as opposed to the total duration.
In other words, and what
they showed was that
improvements in learning
or deficits in learning were
more related to whether or not
you got six hours, six
hours, five hours, six hours,
that was better than if
somebody got for instance,
six hours, 10 hours, seven
hours, four or five hours.
See you might say, "Well,
that's crazy because I thought
we were just all supposed
to get more sleep
and there's more REM towards morning."
It turns out that forsake
of learning new information
and performance on exams in particular,
that's what was measured,
limiting the variation in
the amount of your sleep
is at least as important
and perhaps more important
than just getting more sleep overall.
And I think this will
bring people great relief,
many people great relief
who are struggling to "get enough sleep."
Remember, a few episodes ago
I talked about the difference between
fatigue and insomnia.
You know, fatigue tends
to be when we are tired.
Insomnia tends to lead to a
sleepiness during the day
when we're falling asleep.
And you don't want that,
you don't want either
of those things really.
But, I found it striking that
the data from this study
really point to the fact that
consistently getting about
the same amount of sleep
is better than just getting more sleep.
And I think nowadays
so many people are just
aiming for more sleep,
and they're rather troubled
about the fact that
they're only getting five hours,
or they're only getting
six hours in some cases.
It may be the case that
they are sleep deprived
and they need more sleep,
but some people just
have a lower sleep need.
And I find great relief,
personally, in the fact that
consistently getting,
for me, about six hours
or six and a half hours is
going to be more beneficial
than constantly striving for eight or nine
and finding that some
nights I'm getting five
and sometimes I'm getting nine
and varying around the mean.
As I recall, and I think I'm
gonna get this precisely right,
but if not I know that I'm at least close.
For every hour variation in sleep
regardless of whether
or not it was more sleep
than one typically got,
there was a 17% reduction in performance
on this particular exam type.
So this is powerful.
This means that we should strive for
a regular amount of sleep.
And for some of us that
means falling asleep
and waking up and going back to sleep.
For some people means falling asleep and
waking up and not getting back to sleep.
Now ideally, you're getting
the full compliment of slow
wave sleep early at night
and sleep toward morning,
which is REM sleep.
Which brings us to, how
to get more REM sleep.
Well, there are a couple
of different ways but
here's how to not get
more REM sleep. All right.
First of all, drink a lot of fluid
right before going to sleep.
One of the reasons why we wake up
in the middle of the
night to use the bathroom
is because when our bladder is full
there is a neural connection,
literally a set of neurons
and a nerve circuit
that goes to the brain
stem that wakes us up.
Actually some people
that I know and won't be mentioned,
actually use this to try and adjust
for their jet lag when
they're trying to stay awake.
Having to urinate is one of the most
anxiety evoking experiences
anyone can have.
If you really have to go to the bathroom
it's very hard to fall
asleep or stay asleep.
And bedwetting, which happens in kids
very early on is a failure
of those circuits to mature
until, you know, I think
we all assume that babies
are gonna pee in their sleep,
but adults aren't supposed to do that.
And the circuits take some time to develop
and in some kids they develop
a little bit later than others.
So having a full bladder is
one way to disrupt your sleep.
You don't wanna go to bed
dehydrated, but that's one way.
On the other hand there is evidence
that if you want to
remember your dreams more,
or remember more of your dreams
there is a tool that you can use.
I don't necessarily recommend it,
which is to drink a bunch of
water before you go to sleep.
And then what happens is
you tend to break in and out of REM sleep.
It tends to be fractured.
And with a sleep journal
and they've done these laboratory studies.
Believe it or not, people will
recall more of their dreams
because they're in this
kind of semi-conscious state
because they're constantly
waking up throughout the night.
I suggest not having a full
bladder before you go to sleep.
That one's kind of an
obvious one, but nonetheless.
The other one is if you
recall that during REM sleep
we have a shift in
neurotransmitter such that
we have less
serotonin, right?
Just wanna make sure I got that right.
Excuse me, less serotonin.
There are a lot of supplements out there
geared toward improving sleep.
I've taken some of them and
I've taken many of them,
if not all of them at this point.
So I could report back to you.
And I think I mentioned
on a previous episode
that when I take tryptophan,
or anything that contains 5-HTP, which is
serotonin or a precursor to serotonin,
serotonin is made from tryptophan,
I tend to fall very deeply asleep
and then wake up a few hours later.
And that makes sense now
based on the fact that,
you just don't want a lot
of REM sleep early on.
What was probably happening
is that I was getting a
lot of REM sleep early on,
because low levels of serotonin
are typically associated
with slow wave sleep
and that comes early in the night.
So for some people those
supplements might work,
but be aware serotonin supplements
could disrupt the timing of
REM sleep and slow wave sleep.
And in my case led to waking up
very shortly after going to sleep
and not being able to get back to sleep.
Now if you want to increase
your slow wave sleep.
That's interesting. There
are ways to do that.
One of the most powerful ways
to increase slow wave sleep,
the percentage of slow wave sleep,
apparently without any disruption
to the other components
of sleep and learning
is to engage in resistance exercise.
It's pretty clear that resistance exercise
triggers a number of metabolic
and endocrine pathways
that lend themselves to
release of growth hormone,
which happens early in the night.
And resistance exercise
therefore can induce
a greater percentage of slow wave sleep.
It doesn't have to be done very
close to going to bed time.
In fact, for some people
the exercise could be disruptive,
for reasons I've talked
about in previous episodes.
But resistance exercise,
unlike aerobic exercise
does seem to increase the
amount of slow wave sleep,
which as we know is involved in
motor learning and the acquisition of
fine detailed information
not general rules,
or the emotional
components of experiences.
For those of you that are
interested in lucid dreaming
and would like to increase
the amount of lucid dreaming
that you're experiencing,
I haven't been able to
track down that device
with the red light that I
described at the beginning,
but there are a number of just simple
zero technology tools that
one could use in principle.
One is to set a queue.
The way this works is you come
up with a simple statement
about something that you'd like to see,
or experience later in dreams.
You can, for instance,
write down, you know,
something like, I want to
remember the red apple.
I know it sounds silly and trivial,
and you look at that you would
probably wanna write it down
on a piece of paper.
You might even want to draw a red apple,
and then before you go to
sleep you would look at it
and then you would just go to sleep.
There are some reports that doing that
for several days in a row can
lead to a situation in which
you are suddenly in your dream
and you remember the red apple,
and that gives you a
sort of tether to reality
between the dream state and reality
that allows you to navigate and shape
and kind of adjust your dreams.
Lucid dreaming does not have to be,
or include the ability to
alter features of the dream,
you know, to be able to
control things in the dream.
Sometimes it's just the
awareness that you are dreaming,
but nonetheless some people
enjoy lucid dreaming.
And then for people that
have a lot of lucid dreams
that feel kind of overwhelmed by those,
that's going to involve trying to
embrace protocols that can set
the right duration of sleep.
There's a little bit
of literature not a lot
that shows that keeping the
total amount of sleep per night
to say six hours such that
you begin sleep and end
at the beginning and end of
one of these ultradian cycles,
can be better than waking up
in the middle of one of
these ultradian cycles.
So try and find the right
amount of sleep that you need,
that's right for you,
and then try and get that
consistently night to night.
If you're a lucid dreamer
and you don't like it,
then you may want to start to
make sure that you're waking up
at the end of one of
these ultradian cycles.
So in this case,
it would be better to
wake up after six hours
than after seven and if you did
sleep longer than six
hours, maybe you'd wanna get
to seven and a half hours.
'Cause that's gonna reflect
the end of one of these 90 minute cycles,
as opposed to waking up in the middle.
Alcohol. Alcohol and marijuana
are well known to induce states that are
pseudo sleep like.
Especially, when people fall asleep
after having consumed alcohol or THC,
one of the active components of marijuana.
Alcohol, THC
and most things like them,
meaning things that
increase serotonin, or GABA
are going to disrupt the pattern of sleep.
They're going to disrupt the depth.
They're going to disrupt
the overall sequencing
of more slow wave sleep
early in the night and more
REM sleep later in the night.
That's just the reality.
There are some things that
at least, in a few
studies that I could find
seem to suggest that you could
increase the amount of slow wave sleep
using things like arginine,
the amino acid arginine.
Although, you really wanna check.
Arginine can have effects
on heart, et cetera
has other effects.
But, alcohol, THC, not
gonna be great for sleep
and depth of sleep.
You might feel like you
can fall asleep faster,
but the sleep that you're accessing
really isn't the kind of
deep restorative sleep
that you should be getting.
Now, of course, if that's what you need
in order to sleep and that's
within your protocols,
I've said here before,
I'm not suggesting people take anything.
I'm not a medical doctor.
I'm not a cop.
So I'm not trying to
irregulate anyone's behavior.
I'm just telling you
what the literature says.
Some of you may want
to explore your dreams
and meaning of dreams, et cetera.
You know, there's not a lot of hard data
about how to do this,
but a lot of people report
keeping a sleep journal,
where a dream journal can be very useful.
So they mark when they
think they fell asleep
the night before, when they woke up
and if they wake up in
the middle of the night,
early in the morning
they'll just write down
what they can recall of their dreams.
And even if they recall nothing,
many people have the
experience of mid morning
or later afternoon that
suddenly comes to them
that they had a dream about
something and writing that down.
I kept a dream journal for a while.
It didn't really afford me much.
I didn't really learn anything
except that my dreams were very bizarre.
But, there are some things
that happen in dreams
that are associated with REM sleep
as compared to slow wave sleep,
which can tell you whether or not
your dream likely happened in
REM sleep or slow wave sleep.
And the distinguishing
feature it turns out
is something called theory of mind.
Theory of mind is actually an idea
that was developed for the
study and assessment of autism.
And it was initially that
phrase, theory of mind,
was brought about by Simon Baron Cohen,
who is Sacha Baron Cohen,
the comedians brother.
Simon Baron Cohen is a psychologist and
to some extent an
neuroscientist at Oxford.
And theory of mind tests
are done on children.
And the theory of mind test is
some what like the following,
a child is brought into a laboratory
and watches a video of
a child playing with some sort of toy.
And then at the end of
playing with that toy
they put the toy in a
drawer and they go away,
and then another child comes
in and is looking around
and then the experimenter asks the child
who's in the experiment,
the real child and says,
"You know, what does the child think?
You know, what are they feeling?"
And most children have a particular age,
five or six or older
will say, "Oh, you know,
he or she is confused, they
don't know where the toy is."
Or, they'll say something that implies
what we call theory of mind,
that they can put their
ideas and their mind
into what the other child
is likely to be feeling or experiencing.
That's theory of mind.
And it turns out that this is used
as one of the assessments for autism,
because some children,
not all, but some children
that have autism or that
go on to develop autism
don't have this theory of mind.
They tend to fixate on the fact that
the first child put the toy in the drawer.
They'll say it's in the drawer
as opposed to answering the question
which is how does the
second child feel about it,
or what are they experiencing?
So theory of mind is something that
emerges early in life as a part of the
maturation of the circuits in the brain
associated with emotional
learning and social interactions.
And we experienced this in certain dreams.
So if you had a dream
that you're puzzled about,
or that you're fixated on
and you're thinking about,
you might ask, "In that dream
was I assessing somebody
else's emotion and feeling,
or was I very much in my own
first person experience?"
And that the tendency
is that theory of mind
tends to show up most in
these REM associated dreams.
Now this isn't a hard and fast rule,
but chances are if you were in a dream
and you were thinking about other people
who wanted to do something to you,
you were thinking about their desire
to chase you or help you,
or something that was related
to someone else's emotional experience.
It was probably a REM dream.
That dream occurred in
rapid eye movement sleep
as opposed to slow wave sleep.
And that makes sense when you
think about the role of REM
in emotional unlearning of associations
with particular life events.
That REM is rich with
all sorts of exploration
of the emotional load of being chased,
or the emotional load of
having to take an exam the next day,
or being late for something.
But again, if you're fixated
or you can recall thinking a lot about,
or feeling a lot about
what somebody else's motivations were
then chances are it was in REM and if not
chances are it was in slow wave sleep.
Today we've been in a deep
dive of sleep and dreaming,
learning and unlearning.
And I just want to recap
a few of the highlights
and important points.
A lot more slow wave sleep and
less REM early in the night,
more REM and less slow wave
sleep later in the night.
REM sleep is associated with
intense experiences without
this chemical epinephrine
that allows us the anxiety or fear.
And almost certainly has an important role
in uncoupling of emotion from experiences.
Kind of self-induced therapy
that we go into each night.
That bears striking resemblance
to things like EMDR and
ketamine therapies and so forth.
Slow wave sleep is critical, however,
it's critical mostly for motor learning
and the learning of specific details.
So REM is kind of emotions and
general themes and meaning,
and slow wave sleep, motor
learning and details.
I personally find it fascinating
that consistency of sleep,
meaning getting six hours every night
is better than getting ten
one night, eight the next,
five the next, four the next.
I find that fascinating and I
think I also like it because
it's something I can control better
than just trying to sleep more,
which I think I'm not
alone and agreeing that
that's just hard for
a lot of people to do.
This episode also brings
us to the conclusion of
a five episode streak where
we've been focusing on sleep
and transitions in and out of
sleep, non sleep depressed.
We've talked about a lot
of tools, morning light,
evening light, avoiding lights,
blue blockers, supplements,
tools for measuring sleep
duration and quality.
We've been covering a lot of themes.
I like to think that by now
you're armed with a number
of tools and information.
Things like knowing when
your temperature minimum is,
knowing when you might
wanna view light or not,
when you might wanna
eat or take hot showers,
or God forbid a cold shower,
something that most people
including me more or less loath,
but can have certain benefits.
And that will allow you
to shape your sleep life
and get this consistent,
or more or less consistent amount of sleep
on a regular basis.
Nobody's perfect. In fact
I have this little joke
that I sometimes tell, it's not funny.
Like, most of the jokes I
tell I'm told are not funny,
but, you know, there's so
much excitement now about
intermittent fasting.
Sometimes I think that
someone should start
something on intermittent
sleep deprivation,
although we're already doing that.
We are all experiencing lack
of sleep from time to time.
And I don't think we should
catastrophize that too much.
I think that what we wanna do
rather than accumulate
a sleep anxiety is to...
You know, if we get a bad
night's sleep, we want to adjust,
we want to get back on track
and just get the
consistent amount of sleep.
Use those non sleep deep rest
protocols to help us relax
when we're feeling anxious,
we're having trouble waking
up in the middle of the night.
There are a lot of tools out there,
and most of them are zero cost.
And so I hope you'll
find those beneficial.
If you've been hearing Costello snoring
throughout this episode.
I apologize in his behalf.
As I said, in the welcome
video to this podcast
he's an integral part of the podcast.
A few people have said, "Hey,
that noise in the background
is really disruptive."
Hey, what can I say?
Costello is a ten-year-old
bulldog mastiff.
The lifespan on those
animals is about 10 years.
So I'm not trying to make you feel guilty,
but, you know, after he's gone
there won't be any snoring,
although I'll probably
get a different dog.
So sort of a, what were the
kids say, sorry not sorry.
Sorry not sorry about the snoring
and I'm sorry if it's
disruptive genuinely,
but he's here for the hall.
So that's what that's about.
As we close out the segment on sleep
we are moving into a new theme and topic
for the next four to five episodes.
We are going to discuss the science
and the tools related to neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity is a remarkable feature
of the nervous system.
In fact, it's the defining
feature of the nervous system,
which is its ability to change itself
in response to experience.
That is unlike every other tissue
and collection of cells
and organ in our body.
It's really what makes us us as a species
and it's what makes us us as individuals,
and it's really where our potential lies.
Everything that we know,
everything we can do,
and our true potential
in terms of what we will ever be able to
know, do, say, in life is set by
the limits of neuroplasticity.
So we're going to explore
learning and childhood,
learning and adulthood.
We're going to discuss detailed protocols
as they relate to sensory plasticity.
Learning new sensory information,
versus motor plasticity or
sensory motor integration.
We're going to talk about
language acquisition.
We're going to be talking about
emotional acquisition and breadth.
As well as, I think a
topic a lot of people
are gonna find fascinating is,
the relationship between plasticity set
during childhood attachment
to parent or other caregiver,
and how that maps onto
adult relationships.
Many of you have probably heard about
secure attach or insecure attach.
The A, B and C, D babies as they're called
from the classic studies
of Bowlby and others.
But now there's actual
neuroscience that can say
which circuits were active
during those early life attachment
and how those map to
adult attachment styles,
challenges, and what makes us more likely
to select certain partners
and styles of attachment,
as well as how to change those.
It's really fascinating and I think
neuroscience's time has
come for neuroplasticity.
We're also gonna talk, of course, about
supplements and chemicals
and machines and devices
that can assist in speeding
up the plasticity process.
Or believe it or not, there are some cases
where you might want to delay plasticity
in order to get more depth of learning
and have that learning last longer.
Something that is just absolutely
spectacular literature.
So I'm very excited to
move on to that topic soon.
I hope that the tools that
you've acquired so far
and the knowledge that
is helping you with your self evaluation
and experimentation as you see fit,
and is allowing you to
not just sleep better,
but feel better while you're awake.
And hopefully has set the
stage for you to learn better
as we start to march into
the month on neuroplasticity.
Many of you have asked
how you can help support
the Huberman Lab Podcast and we
greatly appreciate the question.
You can help support the podcast
by subscribing to the YouTube channel,
if you haven't already
and leaving comments and
questions in the comment section.
If you could subscribe
on Apple and or Spotify,
that's helpful.
And there's a place on Apple
Podcasts to leave a rating,
as well as comments about how
you feel about the podcast.
If you could suggest the
podcast to friends and coworkers
and anyone else that
you think would benefit
from the information
that also really helps us
get the word out.
And of course, check out our sponsors
because that's a very direct way
to help us continue to
get this information
out to the general public.
Many of you have asked about supplements
and where I personally get my supplements.
I've partnered with Thorne
and I get my supplements
from Thorne because,
by my view they have the
highest level of stringency
and precision in terms
of what's in the bottle.
And they also have very
high quality standards.
They're partnered with the Mayo Clinic
and all the major sports organizations.
If you wanna try Thorne supplements
you can go to thorne.com.
So that's Thorne spelled
thorne.com/u/huberman.
And if you do that you can see
the formulations that I take.
And you'll also get 20% off,
not just those formulations,
but anything that Thorne makes.
That's thorne.com/u/huberman
to get 20% off anything that they provide.
Last but not least, a
few people wrote to me
with some questions/corrections
about things that I said
in previous podcasts.
So in keeping with my goal of
making the information accurate and clear,
I just want to correct myself
about a few things that I said.
One of those and I'm guessing
it probably came from an endocrinologist
or somebody else that knows
a lot about testicles said,
"Huberman, you mentioned that testosterone
is made by the sertoli cells
of the testes, and it's not.
It's made by the leydig
cells of the testes."
And indeed you are correct.
And so I want to make
sure that I clarify that.
Testosterone is made by the
leydig cells of the testes,
not by the sertoli cells.
The sertoli cells make 5
alpha-reductase and aromatase,
and some other enzymes involved
in conversion of testosterone into
things like DHT and estrogen.
So thank you for that correction.
I genuinely appreciate it. I misspoke.
The other thing I said,
was at one point I said,
"Typical temperature is 96.8
when I actually meant to say 98.6."
So it was a dyslexic slip
on my part and I apologize.
I don't know that I'm dyslexic.
I know I haven't been clinically
diagnosed with dyslexia,
but I swapped them,
which sometimes happens
when I'm going fast.
So I apologize. I'll use
this a moment to just say
temperature varies a lot
across the day and night,
that was a theme of previous podcasts.
So we can't really talk about
average temperature anyway,
but I do want to be clear that
most people think about
average temperature as 98.6.
I misspoke, my error and I apologize.
Thank you for joining me in this journey
of the nervous system in biology
and trying to understand the mechanisms
that make us who we are and
how we function in sleep
and in wakefulness.
It's really an incredible
landscape to consider
and I hope that you're getting
a lot out of the information.
As always thank you for
your interest in science.
[upbeat music]